Let us continue our discussion of inductive
definitions.
So, recall that functions like factorial and
insertion sort are natural inductive definitions
in terms of smaller sub problems.
And the attraction of looking at inductive
definitions is that, we can very easily come
up with recursive programs that implement
them in a very obvious way.
But, the challenges is, in identifying the
sub problems, I am making sure that they are
not overlapping. So, in the case of factorial
remember that any smaller input factorial
is a sub problem, similarly for sorting you
can think of any segment of the list to be
sorted as a sub problem. And in general, we
are looking at recursive solutions or inductive
solutions where the solution to the function
f we are trying to define is derived, by combining
solutions to the subproblems of this original
problem and so we compute f on smaller inputs
than y.
So, let us see how this works with the very
familiar series that you may know of called
the Fibonacci numbers. So, let us define the
Fibonacci numbers as follows, the first two
Fibonacci numbers are 0 and 1 and then every
successive Fibonacci number is obtained by
adding these two. Now, it is instructive to
see even before you begin how we would numerate
the Fibonacci numbers. We know that the first
two are 0 and 1 and we know the next one is
sum of these two. So, the next one will be
1 again, next one will be 2, for this 1 plus
1, next one will be 3, next one will be 5,
next one will be 8, next one will be 13 and
so on. So, it is very clear that though these
numbers have an inductive definition and there
is an obvious recursive function that goes
with it which I have just mention in a minute.
There is a very efficient way of enumerating
these numbers, directly almost in linear time.
So, how does the definition of the function
go? Fibonacci of n is just if n is 0, return
0, if n is 1 return 1. So, if n is 0 or 1,
the value is n itself. Otherwise, you compute
value recursively using this criterion Fibonacci
of n minus 1 plus Fibonacci of n minus 2 and
finally, whatever value you are computed you
return.
So, where is the catch? So, let’s see how
this would work on an small input like we
have just saw Fibonacci. So, we just saw the
Fibonacci of 5, this 5, we know that we start
with 0, 1, 1, so these are the arguments.
So, the values are 0, 1, 1, 2, 3 and then
5. So, we are trying to compute, if this is
a Fibonacci number we computed very fast.
But, let us see how this recursive thing would
actually got, if I call Fibonacci of 5, recursively
it would ask me to compute Fibonacci of 4
and 3, Fibonacci of 4 in turn will ask me
to compute 3 and 2.
Now, 3 in turn will ask me to compute 2 and
1, then 2 in turn will ask me to compute 1
and 0. Now, fortunately for 1 and for 0, I
have a base case. So, I will get those values
1 and 0 respectively. So, since I got 1 and
0 and I will now be able to compute Fibonacci
of 2 at sum of those and I will get the answer
1. Now, I have turn into Fibonacci 1, again
it is a base case, I get the answer 1.
So, now I have both the answers required for
Fibonacci of 3. So, I get the answer 2, now
I go back and I compute Fibonacci of 2, but
remember I have already computed it, but because
I did not make note of this in some sense,
I’m blindly doing recursion. Fibonacci of
2 will again ask me to compute Fibonacci of
1 and 0, which will again produce the base
cases 1 and 0.
So, I will again compute Fibonacci of 2 as
1 and now with both Fibonacci of 3 and 2 are
available, I will get the answer Fibonacci
of 4 and 3. And now, I will go back and compute
Fibonacci 3 yet again. So, I will do this
whole tree again, 3 calls 2 and 1, 2 calls
1 and 0, these return the base case, that
give me a value for 2, 1 returns the base
case, this give me a value for 3 and finally,
after all this, I get the value of Fibonacci
as 5.
So, the problem we can see is that functions
that Fibonacci of 3 have been computed twice
in full and full complexity, other functions
like Fibonacci of 2 have been computed 1,
2, 3 times and so on. And of course, Fibonacci
of 1 towards it is base case have been call
several times: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 times and Fibonacci
of 0 has been called 3 times.
So, this is the big problem with this recursive
computation, that we seem to be computing
too many things, see ideally in order to compute
Fibonacci of 5 and I know I need 4, 3, 2,
1 and 0. So, I need only six values totally
to be computed and I am making a lot more
than six computations.
So, the crux of the problem is that there
are these sub problems which arise in different
context within this recursive computation,
for Fibonacci of 3 is generated both by the
original call of Fibonacci of 4 and the nested
recursive call of Fibonacci of 4, so the original
called Fibonacci of 5 and the nested recursive
called Fibonacci of 4. So, we have this entire
tree of computation which is duplicated and
because of this kind of wasteful recomputation,
over all the computation tree grows exponentially.
So, you can actually find in general, that
in order to compute the nth Fibonacci number,
you actually do some exponential in n one
steps. Even though, we can see that you can
just compute nth Fibonacci number in linear
time, we just sorted, you just computed as
the 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 and so on.
So, one way to get around this is to make
sure that you never reevaluate a sub problem.
So, you build up a table which is sometimes
called a memory table and what does this table
do? it just keeps track of every value for
which you have computed the function before.
So, it is just the look up in a language like
java, it could be a hash map or a language
like python, it could be a dictionary. Every
time you call a f on a value x, you just store
x comma f(x) in this table.
So, that you can look at up and see we already
computed it. So, it is called memoization.
So, this term memoization comes from the word
memo with some of few may occur. So, memo
is a note which remains you are something
are remains somebody else or something. So,
memoization, memo table or a memory table
is supposed to remind you that the value your
time to compute has already been computed.
So, how does memoization work? So, we have
this memo table here, so this is our memo
table, so in this memo table it is just a
table where we fit different value of k and
fib k as we compute them. We have assumed
that we have computed nothing, we do not even
know the base case, we are just going to apply
the recursive definition. But, every time
we compute something, we will first look up
the table before we computed recursively and
if we have to computed recursively, then we
will store each newly computed back end of
the table.
So, let us start as before we wanted to start
computing the Fibonacci of 5. So, the recursive
definitions says, that we should call Fibonacci
of 4 and 3. Now, we go to 4, where just doing
recursion left to right, so 4 will call 3
and 2, 3 will call 2 and 1, 2 will call 1
and 0, at this point we try to evaluate Fibonacci
of 1 to the first time. When, we evaluate
Fibonacci of 1 for the first time, we get
a base case and it tells us that this value
is 1. So, we will return this value, but we
will also store it in the table.
So, now, we are made up first entry in the
table itself, Fibonacci of 1 is 1, then we
look at Fibonacci of 0 and again, it is a
new value, we got it from the base case, but
we have never computed before. So, now, we
have computed it by computing the base case
and again, we put an entry in the tables side,
Fibonacci of 0’s sign. So, with this as
before we have got Fibonacci of 2.
So, up to this point, we have not saved anything,
excepted we have also now, because we have
computed Fibonacci of 2, we have added it
too, we done new value computed we put it
into the table. Now, to continue with Fibonacci
of 3 I need to go back to Fibonacci of 1,
of course, it is the base case, but what my
table thing tells us, tells you is that you
should look at the table first. So, we go
down the table, hopefully it is organized
in some efficient way, but in the worst case,
let us just do naively scan it, we look have
I ever done Fibonacci of 1 before, and see
that I have done Fibonacci of 1 before.
So, it will look up that value without calling
the base case, without looking at the function
definition and just return Fibonacci of 1
is 1. So, we have indicated it by turning
it orange that this call was actually returned
from the table, it didn’t actually require
computation. So, now, that have 1 and 1, Fibonacci
of 3 is now 2. So, now I have to continue
with Fibonacci of 4. So, now I have to call
Fibonacci of 2 again.
So, now it will go down and say have I ever
seen Fibonacci of 2 and say I have and therefore,
without doing the re computation, it will
look up this memo table and again we mark
it as in orange value, because it came from
the table, it returns the value 1 which we
stored in the table. So, now having computed
this, we’ve got Fibonacci of 4. So, we compute
Fibonacci of 4 to be 3 from the recursive
definition and there again we store it in
the table.
So, every new value that we compute, we store
in the table that could be able to use it
again or not we do not know, but if we want
to use it again, it is good to have it there.
So, we just blindly put everything that we
ever compute back into the table for future
use. now, we come back to the top Fibonacci
of 5, we have got the left branch, we need
the right branch, we go to Fibonacci of 3,
earlier we had blindly reproduces the entire
tree at the bottom in order to get Fibonacci
of 3, but this time we are smarter, we go
down the table and we find that 3 has been
computed before and the value is 2, so we
get this value of 2.
And now, we have both the answers that we
need for Fibonacci of 5 and so we get Fibonacci
of 5 is 5 and again, we put it in the table,
although in this particular case, we are not
going to use it as the computation is over,
but it could be part of a bigger computations,
so we just keep doing this. So, what you can
see in this is that the computation tree which
used be exponential is now linear.
Why is it linear? Because, every value which
is in blue appears in the 1s and every value
which in not in blue is a look up in the table,
So, it cost nothing, so therefore, we have
now made, so this more or less this memoized
Fibonacci is what we do, whether we do it
in a different order, when we actually compute
it by hand.
So, just to see what the memoized Fibonacci
looks like: So, the green code is what we
wrote earlier, fib of n, if n is 0 or 1, set
the value to n, else set the value to the
fib of n minus 1, fib of n minus 2 and return.
So, now we have introduced a memo bits which
are the red ones. So, we have a table which
we call fib table, whose values are indexed
by the position.
So, fib of 6, if I compute it’ll go in to
fib table 6. So, when I get an argument to
fill, the first thing I do is I look whether
fib table has an entry for that. So, if fib
table of n exists return whatever it says,
if it does not exist, then we compute it,
once we have computed it, before we do anything
we put it back in the table. So, that next
time we will not compute it again. So, every
new value it is put back in the table and
then, we return it.
So, when we return a value here, it has been
computed for the first time, but it has been
stored in the table. So, the next time, I
get the same N I will come here and I will
exit at this point. So, this is our memoized
Fibonacci, it just has a very simple check
for the table at the beginning and when you
compute the value, it puts it back.
So, this is a very simple thing that you can
do, you can do this for any functions. So,
supposing you had some recursive function
or inductive function with three arguments,
then you just have a table with three indices.
So, let us call it a f table, for computing
f. So, you have some inductive way of computing
the value from the sub problems. So, first
you look up have I ever seen this x, y, z
before? If so just return it.
Otherwise, compute a new value for this given
x, y and z in terms of the recursive definition
from the inductive structure of the problem.
Having computed it, put it back in the table,
so that you never have to compute it explicitly
again and then you return. So, this is a generic
scheme which can be applied to any recursive
function that you might write, the only thing
you have do is you have to make sure that
you can design a table with their appropriate
look up and look it up it is efficiently.
Because, if spend a long time looking up the
value of the table, then that is lost. So,
if you can make it up end of array look up
that is an ideal, so this is memoization.
So, the other term that we introduce in the
last lecture is dynamic programming. So, what
dynamic programming does is it tries to eliminate
the recursive part of evaluating an inductive
definition. So, in memoization what we do
is, we evaluate the inductive definition recursively
exactly as we would normally, the only thing
is we keep a table which helps us to avoid
having to compute the same thing twice.
In dynamic programming, you anticipate what
the table should look like and how the values
in the table depend on it. So, supposing we
have computing Fibonacci of 5, then by some
simple analysis of Fibonacci, we know that
if Fibonacci of I requires anything at all,
it requires things smaller than it and the
smallest thing you can get a Fibonacci of
0. Therefore, from Fibonacci of 5, we immediately
know that the sub problem that could be of
interest to us are all sub problems between
Fibonacci of 0 and Fibonacci of 5.
Fibonacci of 5 is not going to require Fibonacci
of 6, 7, 8. Nor can we call Fibonacci of the
negative numbers because it is not defined.
So, there’s a very small and finite set
of values which we need to consider. Now,
the next observation is that we can compute
the dependencies from the problem structure;
this is from the inductive definition. So,
Fibonacci of 4 is equal to, I mean Fibonacci
of n is n minus 1 plus n minus 2. So, 5 depends
on 4 and 3.
So, I would say that, there is in order to
compute 5, I must have first computed 4 and
3. So, I will draw an arrow from what it depends
on to what it is. So, 5 depends on 4, 5 depends
on 3. So, I put an arrow from 4 to 3 and 4
to 5 and 3 to 5, saying that there is this
dependency. In turn 4 depends on 3 and 2,
and 3 depends on 2 and 1, and 2 depends on
1 and 0.
And of course, 1 and 0 are the base cases
and they do not depend on anything. So, the
dependencies will form a DAG. Why do they
form a DAG? well it’s quite obvious they
must from a DAG, because if there are cyclic
dependencies you cannot compute one before
the other. So, it is a very natural thing
in any kind of dependency, whether it is dependency
between pass that we saw in when we did DAG
begin with there are many, have do something
else it is presides there, it saying that,
if I cannot compute Fibonacci of 2, I cannot
compute Fibonacci of 3, because it has to
be done first.
Now, that I know these dependencies, I can
now enumerate them in any topological order,
such that when I reach a value to be computed,
everything it depends on is known before.
So, for example here a natural order would
just be of course, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, because
both of these are now elements with no incoming
edges. So, I can either start my topological
order with either 0 or with 1.
So, let us assume I start with 0’s, so I
know that Fibonacci of 0 depends on nothing,
it must be a base case so I fill it in, likewise
I know that Fibonacci of 1 depends on nothing.
So, it is a base case, so I fill that in,
so this point I have done both of these, since
I have done both of these, these edges are
gone, so there is nothing pointing into 2.
So, this is just topological sort, the basic
topology set is also there.
So, 3 still has a dependency namely 2, but
2 has no dependencies anymore because both
1 and 0 are now used I can fill in Fibonacci
of 2, then fill in Fibonacci of 3, 4 and 5
and this is exactly what we did earlier, when
we tried to compute Fibonacci by hand. So,
what you were actually executing, when you
are writing off the Fibonacci numbers left
to right, where there is looking the previous
to and computing the next one is actually
what is called dynamic program.
So, dynamic programming for the Fibonacci
function just consist of iteratively filling
up the table, we start would the value 0 and
1, then for 2 to n, of course, if n is less
than this we will not go through these equation
at all for 2 to n, we fill up the ith entry
from the i minus 1th entry by i minus 2th
entry, but then as we saw before these two
values occurred earlier, so they will already
filled. So, I have converted my memo table
filling from a recursive computation filling
on demand as it were to filling blindly from
beginning to end, which is dynamic program.
So, to summarize, we have seen two strategies
to make recursive computations of inductive
functions more efficient, the first is memoization.
So, what memoization does is whenever it computes
the value of the function in sub problem,
it puts it into a table. And before it calls
the function recursively to compute the value,
it will look up the table to see if this value
has already been computed. The same value
is never the same. Computation never happens
twice.
In dynamic programming on the other hand,
we analyze the problem structure, we identify
the sub problems and we know that this sub
problem structure satisfies a DAG, the dependencies
must form a DAG, because if it’s not a DAG,
then we will have cycles and things we will
not be able to solve anyway. And having done
this, what we get from dynamic programming
is iterative evaluation.
So, this is actually in practice a big saving,
because in most programming languages there
is a hidden cost to recursion because every
function call actually requires a certain
amount of operating system and programming
language, bureaucracy, some administrate work,
to take them to declare some memory on the
stack and so on and this is avoided a completely
in a dynamic program solution.
So, it is a big saving to be able to remove
even though memoization is going to give us
an optimum number of recursive calls required
for a given problem, if not, going to call
anything twice. It will still involve recursive
calls and recursive calls can be expensive
in their own writing. For the sake of algorithms,
we typically read function call as kind of
unit cost operation, but in practice, it is
not the case. So, dynamic programming can
be a huge saving, because it actually converts,
optimize recursive thing into an iterative
scheme.